summer vacation (also called summer holiday or summer break) is a school holiday in summer between school years and the longest break in the school year. students and instructors are off school typically between 6 and 14 weeks, depending on the country and district. in the united states, summer break is approximately 2.5 months, with students typically getting out of school between late may and mid-june and starting the new school year between mid-august and early september. in republic of ireland, italy, greece, lithuania, latvia, lebanon, romania and russia, the summer break is normally three months, compared to six to eight weeks in australia, britain, canada, india, and germany.in some countries, school summer vacation is only six weeks or two months supposedly so students don't forget large amounts of information learned in the past year (see: summer learning loss).[1][2] other education reformers believed that children were overstimulated in a system which required 48 weeks of schooling. they believe that over-schooling could lead to nervous disorders, depression, insanity, and separation anxiety towards families.[3] they believe that children need the 2–3 months off to relax and also to take a break from other childhood stresses associated with school such as peer pressure, cliques, bullying, and the pressure of heavy loads of homework.some critics of summer vacation point out that american students spend approximately 180 days (26 weeks) per year in school, but asian students are "in school for 240 to 250 days". this is consistent with the conclusions of researchers who suggest that advanced abilities are in proportion to the time spent learning. summer holidays in japan start from late july until early september.[4]in argentina, the school year ends in early- or mid-december and starts late february or early march. also the majority of students get two weeks of holidays during winter, which varies depending on the region of the country from early june to late july or mid-july to early august.in australia, summer officially lasts from december to february, and therefore includes christmas and new year holidays. the dates of australian school holidays (the term used, rather than "vacation") are determined by each state's department of education, the christmas summer holiday being the longest in duration. typically christmas summer holiday in australia last approximately six weeks, usually from mid-december (depending on school year, see below) to late january. this is significantly shorter than north american summer holiday, but australian schools also break for two weeks at easter, and in june and september, giving students and teachers a total of twelve weeks of annual holidays. in many public schools, years 10 through 12 will finish before december 15, allowing time to complete exam marking and results. year 10 commonly finishes at the end of november, year 11 at the end of october, and year 12 (senior year) also at mid or the end of october after 3 weeks of end-of-year exams. this can bring the normal 12 weeks of vacation to 20 weeks of vacation. the intervening periods of school operation without holidays are called "school terms", each term lasting approximately ten weeks. all australian states have relatively similar holiday periods between each term, but there is the ability for this to change, as it did in the melbourne 2006 commonwealth games, when the first term in victorian schools was shortened to 6 weeks and the other subsequently extended to 12 weeks due to severe disruptions to the public and private bus networks used by school students. most private schools in australia have up to four weeks of additional holidays, due to their longer teaching hours during term.in austria, summer vacation dates vary by region, however the break lasts nine weeks throughout the whole country. school usually ends in early july and starts in early september. in the regions of vienna, lower austria and the burgenland summer break starts on the first saturday in july and one week later in carinthia, styria, the tyrol, vorarlberg, salzburg and upper austria. school recommences on the first monday in september in vienna, lower austria and the burgenland and on the second monday of september in the other regions.in bangladesh, summer vacation begins in mid-may and ends in mid june (4 weeks). according to bengali calendar summer vacation related with availability of different kinds of summer fruits in the month of joishtho (mid may to mid june). this is slightly odd for schools to open before the summer solstice begins. also, it is becoming difficult for children to attend school in high temperatures.in barbados, summer holiday dates have varied throughout the years due to the beginning of the hurricane season on june 1st. because of this, major storms affecting the island can cause school to remain closed for days resulting in a pushback of vacation dates. for example, in 2010 with hurricane tomas. recently, summer holiday begins in late-june or early-july and ends in the second week on september.in belgium, summer vacation lasts from july 1 until september 1 (2 months).in bolivia, summer vacation runs from early december to early february[5] (2 months).in bosnia and herzegovina, the start of summer break varies by school, but usually starts at the beginning or mid-june. school starts on the first monday of september. there is also a three-to-four weeks long break during winter (typically starting on 31 december). school is not out on christmas or easter, but students who celebrate those holidays are allowed to miss that day of school.in brazil, summer break lasts between 50 and 60 days; from late november - early december, to early february, typically february 14–25. in addition, for the majority of brazilian students there are two to three weeks off for winter in july.in bulgaria, the time of the break differs according to the grade of the students. the following periods are applied:1st-4th grade: may 31 – september 155th-8th grade: june 15 – september 155th-8th grade in a sports-oriented grade: june 30 – september 159th-11th grade: june 30 – september 1512th grade: school year ends in mid-may.note that 8th grade classes that focus on intensive language learning's summer vacation also starts on the 30th of june, rather than the 15th.[6]in canada, the first day of summer vacation for public schools is the last saturday in june. however, in some provinces students get a professional activity day on the final friday of that school week, and their last day would be on the thursday. depending on the province, students can get 2–3 months of summer vacation. this may vary in quebec (earlier due to provincial june 24 holiday). the last day of summer vacation is labour day. this can vary in private schools. school generally resumes the day after labour day (in september). most have two weeks off for christmas and new year, and a week off in march or april for spring break (sometimes called march break or easter break).in chile, summer vacation lasts from early or mid-december until late february or early march (10, 11 or 12 weeks). in addition, schools have two or three weeks off for winter in july, and one-week-long break for national holidays in mid-september.in the people's republic of china, summer holidays start in early july and often end in early september (3 months).in colombia, summer vacation varies. because of colombia's equatorial climate (see climate of colombia for more information), schools run two different calendars. public schools and some private schools run "calendar a" which has a break between june and july. only some private schools run "calendar b" in which there is a long vacation in july and august. on the other hand, "calendar a" has a long vacation around christmas.in costa rica, summer vacation lasts 2 months. usually begin in late december and end in early february. there are a few schools using the "american" style, those school usually take vacations in late may and then resume again in early august.in croatia, school year is over around 10th june and it usually starts on the first monday of september, but if the first monday is on 1st or 2nd september school year is more likely to start on the second monday. winter break usually begins a few days before christmas and it lasts until mid january. eastern break lasts 10 days.in the czech republic, summer holiday begins on july 1 and ends on august 31 (2 months).[7]in denmark, summer break lasts from the end of june to early or mid-august (6 weeks) . high schools (colleges) usually return to school in early august, but for younger students it can be in the middle.in ecuador, summer vacation varies. because of ecuador's equatorial climate (see climate of ecuador for more information), schools run two different calendars. the coastal region runs vacation january or february, but in the sierra region, summer vacation follows the pattern in july and august.in egypt, summer break lasts from the beginning or the middle of june until the middle of september (3 months – 14 weeks) in public schools, though length slightly differs according to age. in most private schools, summer break lasts from the middle or end of june to the beginning of september (2.5 months – 10 weeks)in estonia, summer holidays start in the beginning of june, the date ranging for different grades. school begins every year on september 1, with a week off in autumn, 2 weeks off at christmas and a week in spring.in ethiopia, the school year usually ends in late may to mid-june and begins in mid-september (8 to 12 weeks).in finland, summer vacation starts on saturday in late may, or in the beginning of june. the vacation lasts for 2 1⁄2 to 3 months. usually, school starts again on august 7 to 18.in france, summer vacation usually consist of july and august (2 months). but in secondary school, students finish mid-june because of the senior's exams. this may vary for private schools.in germany, summer vacation lasts six and a half weeks. the exact dates vary by state as well as from one to the next year, from the earliest (mid-june to late july) to the latest (late july to early september). in germany the annual holidays are split into winter holidays (about one week), easter holidays (mostly about two weeks), summer holiday (about six and a half weeks), autumn holidays (about one to two weeks) and christmas holidays (about one to two weeks). some states like bavaria also have holidays for pentecost. summed up over the whole year the holidays are about thirteen weeks.in greece, the summer vacation lasts for 3 months. schools close june 15 and reopen on september 11. universities generally close mid-july but with great differences between faculties.in guatemala, the summer holidays start in middle october and end in early january (approx 12 weeks).in guyana, the summer holidays start in early july and end in early september (2 months).in hungary, summer vacation usually lasts from mid-june to early september (11 or 12 weeks).in hong kong, summer vacation normally begins in mid-july and ends on the beginning of september (6–7 weeks) for most public schools. however, the starting and ending times of international schools are variable. for example, most esf-based schools start in late june and finish mid-august (7 weeks).in iceland, the duration of the summer vacation can vary from one school to another. typically students go on a summer vacation during the first week of june and return to school in the 4th week of august.[8]in india, summer vacation varies in duration. this is because india is a vast country and different parts of the country face different climatic conditions at the same time. in northern india, school ends in mid-may and begins in the first week of july, except in the kashmir valley where the summer vacation is only for ten days with a long winter break from mid-december to the end of february. in central india, especially in maharashtra, the summer vacation begins in mid-april and school re-opens in mid-june. in southern india, school ends in the last week of march and begins again in beginning of june. in north-east india, school commences on 1 april after which summer vacations start from mid-may and ends after a period of about 35–38 days.it is the hottest month of the year.in iran, summer vacation lasts 3 months. schools close in late june and reopen in late septemberin iraq, summer vacation begins in late may and ends in late september, but the 12th grade vacation begins in late june and ends in mid-october.in the republic of ireland, most secondary schools start summer holidays in the last week of may, or at the end of the junior certificate and leaving certificate exams, and don't return until the first week in september. other holidays include two weeks for easter and another two for christmas and new year, as well as two midterms with one in october/november during the week of halloween and one usually in the month of february. schools are also closed (usually one or two) for st. patrick's day, and bank holidays. students doing exams (junior cert and leaving cert) have to come in some days during june to sit their exams but otherwise have the same break as those not doing exams. primary schools in the republic of ireland work sixteen days longer, so they start their summer holiday at the end of june.[9] private schools in the republic of ireland follow the same pattern, although summer holidays vary.the start of the summer vacation for middle schools and high schools is on june 20 and the end is august 31 (two months and 10 days) and the summer vacation for primary schools and kindergartens start on july 1 and ends on august 31 (two months).in italy, summer vacation for elementary, middle and high schools normally starts on the second week of june and lasts until the first week of september included, for a total of three months. for kindergartens, summer vacation starts at the end of may and lasts until the first week of september. final term examinations for middle school and high school are held until the end of june.in jamaica, summer holidays for primary and secondary schools starts in the first week of july and ends in the first week of september which gives a duration of about eight weeks.these schools also have term breaks at christmas (typically two weeks) and easter (typically one and a half weeks), as well as mid-term breaks of a few days each usually around national heroes day in the christmas (first) term, ash wednesday in the easter (second) term and labour day in the summer (third) term.at the start of each year the ministry of education provides dates for each term and suggested dates for mid-term breaks for primary and secondary schools. these dates might be adjusted based on circumstance such as the loss of teaching time caused by the passage of a hurricane.tertiary institutions using the semester system typically have summer holidays starting in may (at the end of examinations) and ending in early september. this can, however, vary among institutions.in japan, the summer vacation generally lasts from late july to early september, and due to the way education in japan is structured, it takes place within a school year.in jordan, summer vacation lasts almost 3 months and most schools take summer vacation from mid-june to mid-september.in kuwait, summer vacation for elementary and middle school, [1st to 9th grade] starts at the end of may or at the beginning of june and ends at mid to late september, sometimes as far as early october. for high school students, [10th to 12th grade] it starts on june 19–20 and ends at the same time as elementary and middle school.in lebanon, summer vacation lasts almost 3 months and most schools take summer vacation from mid-june to mid-september.in libya, summer break lasts from the beginning or the middle of june until the middle of september (3 months – 14 weeks). there are 5 other smaller vacations : mid-year two-week break around february and two hijri lunar calendar 3-day religious breaks for eid fitr (25 june in 217) and eid adha (1 sept in 2017).in lithuania, summer vacation starts in june 1 and ends on september 1 with the start of a new school year (3 months).in luxembourg, summer vacation starts on july 16 and ends on september 15, lasting a total of two months. there are 5 other smaller vacations : all saints (1 week), christmas (2 weeks), carnival (1 week), easter (2 weeks), pentecost (1 week).in macedonia, the summer vacation starts on june 10 and ends on september 1 in every school.in malta, the summer holidays usually last from the end of june until the end of september (3 months).in moldova, summer vacation begins on 1 june and ends in 1 september (3 months).in morocco, summer vacation lasts from june 20 until the beginning of september (2 months).in mexico, summer vacation starts in early july and finishes in mid-august since 2000. in addition, mexican children get two or three weeks off for christmas and new year (from the third thursday in december to january 7), and two weeks off in march or april for spring break (from the friday before lazarus saturday to the monday after easter monday).however, high school students (from tenth to twelfth grade) and college students have mostly three months of vacation -from late may or early june to early august. like elementary and middle school students, high school students have in addition two weeks off for christmas and new year, and two weeks off in march or april for spring break. moreover, college students get four weeks off for christmas and new year (from mid-december to mid-january) but only one week of spring break.in mongolia, summer vacation usually starts from late may or early june (varies between schools) to the end of august. the school year is divided into 4 terms lasting 8 to 9 weeks each and students take 1 week off after the first and second terms and 2 weeks after the third term.in nepal, summer vacation runs from the end of may to the end of july.in the netherlands, summer vacation is about 6 weeks for primary school and high school, usually from mid-july to late august. there are 3 regions north, central and south.school students officially get the same time off but there often is a one-week period before the vacation dring which the student will only have to go to school for 2 days to receive their grade lists and bring back their books making the holiday 7 weeks unofficially for high school children. however, this does not apply to every school.in new zealand, the school holidays (the term used, rather than "vacation") typically start in mid-december, and end in late january, which is usually 6 weeks.[10] senior secondary school students in year 11, 12 and 13 finish in late-october for study leave. but the summer holidays still do not start until mid-december. and university students don't start until early march and finish in late-october. throughout the year there are 2 week breaks at easter, in july and in september.in nigeria, primary and secondary schools usually start summer vacation in mid-july and resume in the early weeks of september. the vacation is also known as the "3rd-term holiday" and it is the longest break in a school year (typically up to two months). the "first-term break" starts between one and two weeks prior to christmas and ends the first or second week in january, lasting for about three weeks. the "first-term break" is usually the shortest break in a school year. the "second-term break" usually starts a week before easter and lasts for another three weeks. this gives a total of about 14 weeks of holiday in a year. the geographical location of the school is also a factor.tertiary institutions follow a different pattern, as the holiday in each school depends on various factors which include, the course of study and the academic calendar of the school. some tertiary institutions observe their summer breaks in the normal summer period when elementary and high schools observe theirs, while others don't. some courses of study also don't observe any significant holidays, such programmes include engineering, nursing, medicine and a few others. this is usually as a result of students doing their laboratory work, workshop practice, practicals, internship etc. (as the case may be), while the other students in other programmes are on holiday. tertiary schools observe two semesters; while some schools observe a break after the first semester, many others have their breaks combined to just the summer holidays. this long break helps the students get good jobs during the holiday. the total length of break observed in tertiary institutions in a year is 12 to 14 weeks.in norway, summer vacation typically lasts from mid june to mid august, for a minimum of 8 weeks. in the upper secondary schools, the exam period starts in late may and ends the last or second last day before summer break. norwegian students also have about two weeks of vacation from late december until early january, as well as a "winter break", an "easter break" and days off associated with the feast of ascension (typically in late may), 1 may and 17 may (the norwegian constitution day).in oman, summer vacation starts in late may and ends in early september (3 months).in pakistan, summer vacation lasts for two to three months depending on the type of school (public or private). typical summer vacation is from the end of may to mid-august.[11] many private schools are also open in june and july for 8th to 10th grades under the programmes called "summer camps".in panama, summer vacation starts in early december on both types of school (public or private), and ends in late february. (3 months)in paraguay, summer holidays start in december and end in late february (2 months).in the philippines, summer holidays for kindergarten, elementary, and high schools typically start on the third week of march and end in the first to third week of june. this coincides with the country's tropical dry season months from march to june. colleges and universities, however, offer summer classes for students who wants to take advanced subjects or those who fail to pass the prerequisites for the next school year. school year begins in the first week of june, the start of philippines' wet season.in poland, summer vacation starts on the first saturday after june 20 and ends on the first weekday of september except friday. students usually spend 1–1.5 hours at school to pick up their report cards on their last day of school.in portugal, summer vacation starts in mid-june, and finishes in the middle of september.in russia, summer vacation starts on may 25 with the end of an old school year (for 1st–8th and 10th grades) and ends on september 1 with the beginning of a new school year. for 9th and 11th grades, due to exams (ege), the vacation starts in the middle (9th grade) or in the end (11th grade) of june.in romania, summer vacation starts in the third week of june and ends september 9-16 (3 months).in saint lucia, summer vacation starts in early july and ends on the first monday of september (6 weeks).in the school year 2016–2017 the summer break for saudi arabian students started from 25th of may till the 10th of september. this means it will be 110 days, 3 months and a halfin serbia, the summer vacation starts around the ending of june, more precisely by the end of 2nd or 3rd week of june. summer holiday ends on august 31. school officially starts on first working day of september (if september 1 is on saturday or sunday, starting of school is delayed until monday). there are also several other holidays. two day holiday in the first week of november, three week holiday from december 31st to the third week of january and finally a two-week break during easter.for primary school and secondary school students: mid-november to early january (1 ½ months). new school year will start at early january. also, there will be a 1-month holiday in june and 1 week holiday in march and september. most secondary students are released mid or late october due to the annual national examinations for secondary 4/5 students.in slovakia, summer break lasts from july 1 until september 1 (2 months and constitution day).[12]in slovenia, the final exams are usually taken from mid-may to mid-june (high schools) or in june (primary schools). last day of school is june 24 and school −begins on september 1.in south africa, summer holidays usually begin in early december and end in mid-january. winter break lasts from late june to early july, and there are 10 days of easter holidays.in south korea, summer vacation starts in late july and ends in mid-september. the south korean summer vacation takes place within a school year, too. the winter vacation takes place the last week of december until the first week of february.in south sudan, summer vacation starts on december 21 and ends on march 19.in spain, the school year finishes in mid or late june and begins in mid-september. vacation varies by region but often includes a family vacation within spain to cooler temperatures in the north of spain or south or east to the mediterranean beaches.[13]in suriname, summer vacation usually starts in mid-july and ends in late-august.[14] in 2012, a change of summer vacation was proposed by several legislators having summer vacation the same time as the caribbean community.[14] the proposed plan is summer vacation starts from mid-august and ends in early-october.[14]in sweden, summer vacation is between the spring and autumn term. normally it lasts from mid-june to late august (a minimum of 9–10 weeks, differs for each county). in sweden, students end their term, either at a church or in their school, singing traditional summer songs like den blomstertid nu kommer (normally only the first 2 verses).the winter vacation is between the winter and late winter term. it normally lasts from late december until early january. it is normally 3 weeks long.children in elementary school until high school have a week of vacation in the autumn/winter term and also two weeks in the spring/summer term. the one in the autumn is called "novemberlov" which means "november vacation/break" or "höstlov" which means "autumn vacation/break". the two in the spring/summer term is called "sportlov" which means "sport break/vacation" and "påsklov" which means "easter break/vacation".then on 1 may everyone is on vacation in whole sweden. also on 6 june, which is the swedish national day.in switzerland, summer vacation varies in each canton. as an example in zürich, it lasts five weeks and between mid-july and mid-august.[15] in ticino, it last about ten weeks between late june and early september. [16]in syria, summer vacation lasts 3 months. it starts mid june (for primary and secondary schools)and ends mid september. university students have a vacation from early july to early october. this varies 2 or 3 days by school or year . the mid-term holiday is usually a week long.in taiwan, summer vacation starts in early july (late june for university students) and ends in late august (mid-september for university students).in thailand, summer vacation begins in late february to early march and ends in mid-may.primary and secondary schools close the first friday of july and open on the first monday of september (giving students two months). this can vary a day or two by school or year. international schools are in link with the british, canadian, or american systems.in turkey, summer vacation starts in mid-june and ends in mid-september (3 months).in tunisia, summer vacation for the middle school (7th–9th grade) and high school starts on may 30 and ends on september 15. primary schools are off to vacation on june 1 and end on september 15.in england and wales, summer holidays for state schools usually last from the second half of july through to early september which gives a duration of six or seven weeks. in addition, all schools in england and wales have three one-week-long half-term breaks for each of the three terms, one in the autumn term, one in the spring term and one in the summer term. state schools have two weeks off for christmas and easter, which brings the total number of weeks off for state school students per year to 13.in scotland, school summer holidays start in late june and last for about six or seven weeks, with most schools returning around august 17. in addition to summer holidays, scottish schools have one week in october, two weeks at christmas and two weeks at easter. they also have a week off in mid-february. they have two bank holidays in may/june, and one in september.in northern ireland, most schools' summer vacation starts in late june and runs through to the beginning of september. students doing exams (gcse and a-levels) often get "study-leave" from may and do the exams sometime in that month, or early june. schools also have a two-week break for christmas and easter as well as several bank holidays as well as a week off for mid term in mid february. some schools, generally integrated, or catholic, also get time off for st. patrick's day in march. protestant schools don't usually get this day off.in the united kingdom, holiday dates for schools in the independent sector mostly differ from those of schools in the state sector and these differences typically take the form of an extra week's holiday at the beginning and end of each of the long vacations meaning four weeks for the christmas and easter breaks and eight to ten weeks for the summer break but variations in summer vacation length exist between the independent schools themselves. in addition, all schools in the united kingdom have three week-long half-term breaks for each of the three terms including one in the autumn term at the end of october, one in the spring term in mid-february and one in the summer term in late may although these breaks do not always coincide with the state school breaks in autumn ans spring terms. the summer half term break is determined by the break in public exams at the end of may. some universities grant an extended "exam-leave" to students which typically commences in early april, so as to give students a good number of weeks to prepare for the summer exam season which usually starts in mid to late may and finishes at the end of their final exam which usually takes place in early or mid-june. final-year students at independent schools typically finish their time at their school the moment their final exam in the summer exam season finishes and as an encore a special event is usually arranged for late june by the school for the leavers and staff as a way of providing an opportunity for final farewells to be bid. the universities they go on to typically schedule their first term to commence in early october giving school leavers an extended summer break between their time of leaving school and starting at university.in the united states, summer vacation lasts two to three months. the dates vary depending on the location of the school district, with two major formats. one is from late june to early september (in most northern states), the other major format lasting from late may to mid august (in most southern and western states). (excluding some districts, as some schools may end late june and begin early september).summer vacation or break lasts for about 12 weeks, starting anywhere from late may to late june, and ending anywhere from late august to labor day, the first monday in september. this often depends on the region – for example, most schools in the northeastern united states end in june and start the day after labor day, while the majority of schools in the southern united states have schools end in may and start again in august.the origins of the summer holiday break are often believed to be rooted in agriculture. it is widely believed that the school calendar follows the agrarian farming calendar because during the settlement of the united states, the nation primarily consisted of a farming population. this belief maintains that the current school calendar has a two to three-month break so that children could assume the necessary tasks of planting and harvesting crops. however, planting of most crops occurred in the spring and harvest occurred in the fall. rural schools would often break for spring and fall seasons, but continue schooling throughout the summer.[17]the modern school calendar has roots not on rural farms, but instead in urban cities.[citation needed] multiple causes lead to the summer break known by modern american students. in fact, schools in the early 1800s held school throughout the summer. as schooling progressed through bureaucracy, society’s population growth and change, as well as improvements in technology, such as better transportation for students and air conditioned buildings, school calendars also changed.many citizens of upper and middle classes would vacation outside of the sweltering cities during the hot summers. if school continued into the summer months, families would no longer have time together for summer vacations.[18]as school systems grew throughout the united states they became more aligned with college and university schedules, which already observed a break during summer. breaks became more frequent as well. original schools observed new year’s day, easter, fourth of july, thanksgiving, and christmas. the duration of breaks at these observances varied from school to school. more observances have been honored as time has passed, continually changing the school calendar.[19]as the nation expanded and grew, the nation saw the need for an educated populace and more public schools were built. but the need for academic breaks from learning was always seen as necessary. nineteenth century and early twentieth century belief regarded the brain as a muscle, and thought that too much work and strain on the brain could result in injury. therefore, they believed that students should not receive too much education. this was particularly true of younger children whose minds were still developing.[20] as industrialism led to automation and wealth, and the nation recovered and expanded following the civil war, leisure activity became more important to americans. leading advocates for play such as henry curtis[21] believed strongly that children were not having enough time for play. in addition to advocating playground equipment, curtis also advocated that summer should be spent working with families in gardens, and going camping. curtis was a large supporter of boy and girl scouts and encouraged children to engage in scouting during the summer. if children lived in the cities and were unable to go camping or tend to gardens, schools were a premier place for children to be, but the emphasis should be on learning lifelong skills; sewing, woodworking, crafts, and manual labor.[22]in uruguay, summer holidays usually begin in early december, and finish in early march (3 months). students have one week for easter holidays, another week for spring holidays, and two weeks for the holiday season.in venezuela, summer holidays begin in late june or early july and end in late september or early october.in vietnam, summer holidays usually begins in early june or late may and lasts for two months. it's usually from june to august or late may to late july. vietnamese students also have a week or two weeks off for lunar new year which is in late january or mid-february. along with other holidays including but not limited to independence day (vietnam) on september 2, international labour day and reunification day(federal) = federal holidays, (state) = state holidays, (religious) = religious holidays, (week) = weeklong holidays, (month) = monthlong holidays, (36) = title 36 observances and ceremonies
bold indicates major holidays commonly celebrated in the united states, which often represent the major celebrations of the month.